I've got several brushless motors out of
old hard disk drives and floppy disk
drives and I wanted to have to go up to
driving them now to do this you need a
driver IC which handles the commutation
to the three separate phases of the
motor and I found this one the e for
nine for one which is a sensorless fan
driver it's like the name suggests meant
for use and finds but will drive any old
air three-phase motor quite happily the
connections are quite simple there's
very few external components a sense
resistor some control inputs and a pulse
output to tell you fast the farms going
so I made up a little breakout board
that's the chip on the bottom I've
heatsink that there's our thermal pad on
the back of it so I have heatsink to out
with a piece of copper foil there's
external connections to the mortar for
wires common and the three phases and
I've got a scope measuring the the
pulses output so first of all we'll run
this little floppy drive motor as I
think it was maybe a zip drive motor
I've got three of them in my scrap box
running it from a 12 volt supply and
here we go
sup my
sometimes there's a little trouble
deciding which we to start I have a good
this is offensive us driver
it relies on back EMF from the under the
coil and
unlike the butcher spinning up
about the tech beat it will be in a back
EMF produced so it can give around a
little but the square wave waveform
produced
the frequency is about 900 HAP's
and I found that this is our fourth wall
mortar so that will evolve out by 4 to
get the rotational frequency in revs per
second so it works out at the 15,000 rpm
this
we'll try the hard drive motor now as
well I did tape it down this tape is
done because it tends to run away with
the Sun they the context of the motor
were through some little sprung pens on
the back of the back of the motor so I
just made a little bit circuit board to
contact it
so that goes on there and here we go
okay with the this resistor have
actually limited the current lick and
flew and for this larger motor that's
not actually enough current to get it
turning so I'll just shorter the current
sense resistor to start it with
there we go
and this spends up to about five or six
thousand rpm
runs very smoothly quite a bit of
gyroscopic effect from the rotating mass
okay
you
we go back to the zip drive water it
actually does something rather funny
finding that connected trying to do this
with one hand yeah
we spin that up and then reason one edge
drop it
it's a bit like a gyroscope try to
balance on one edge okay hope that was
interesting
it just shows it's quite easy to drive
one of these motors if you've got the
proper chip to do it okay thanks for
watching